[Music]
in atlanta united states neuroscientist
greg burns is adapting a harmless
medical technique to study brain
activity in dogs
okay so stand by we're gonna start the
noise
[Music]
MRI is a technique that's been used in
humans for over 20 years normally we use
it to study what the brain looks like
but with a few tricks we can actually do
what we call functional MRI which looks
at brain activity and by analyzing the
data we can figure out what parts of the
brain are doing what but doing MRI in
animals is an entirely different game
mainly because of the requirement that
the subject has to hold absolutely still
the need to keep still makes it
impossible to scan most animals unless
they're sedated not a good way to study
their brains but Greg has teamed up with
mark Spivak to devise a program to train
dogs for the bizarre conditions they'll
face the key is a steady supply of
snacks well a lot of humans have
difficulty taking MRI first of all
there's the enclosure which provokes
anxiety in many humans second there's
the absolute motionlessness required and
then there's the noise without proper
conditioning and training the dogs would
just run scared for the MRI those that
respond well to training graduate to the
real thing like Katie
[Music]
MRI is painless and does no harm it's at
the very cutting edge of animal science
and it's beginning to give us some
fascinating insights Tricia we're going
to begin the first scan with the
localize are you ready one of Greg's
earliest experiments is revealing an
important clue as to what happens in a
dog's brain when it receives information
from its senses first he's looking at a
visual signal so Katie's in the scanner
right now and Patricia is actually
giving katie hand signals so we've
already taught the dogs through lots of
practice that this means food okay so
every time
Patricia puts the signal up we're going
to be looking in her brain what that
brain response is and we're actually
going to be looking at a very specific
area called the caudate nucleus we also
have another hand signal that looks like
this and that means no reward after
scanning many dogs
Greg's results show the area of the
dog's brain that responds
if we look very closely we find that the
area that's common to all the dogs
corresponds exactly to the same part of
the human brain that responds to reward
rewards like money music food all the
things that humans like it's also
activating in the dog's brain even
though Kady
isn't actually seeing food she can take
a piece of visual information and
interpret it to anticipate that she will
receive food and she's responding
emotionally just like we do this was
pretty amazing because it didn't have to
be that way dogs could be so different
from us than they you know it might have
responded completely differently but
that doesn't seem to be the case and
when you think about what this requires
the dog to do it reveals a complex chain
of thought the results are showing their
dogs and probably most animals that have
brands and minds that are far more
sophisticated than we ever gave them
credit for
[Music]